
It was shown that the
slipped-cofacially stacked spatial arrangement fine-tunes the
electronic excited states and the electronic energy transfer in
the special pair and subunits in photosynthetic light-harvesting
antenna consisting of bacteriochlorophyll dimers. 1,2 For fluorescence properties, it has been known that in general the
J-type aggregates are fluorescent, while the H-aggregates are
not, 3−5 although there are some exceptions. 6
J-type aggregates of ZnPc have rarely been reported. 7−10
Based on UV−vis spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, and
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry measurements of substituted
ZnPc’s, Huang et al. proposed formation of J-type self-
aggregation via Zn−O coordination in noncoordinating
solvents at room temperature. 7 In terms of the molecular
orbital (MO), it was shown that the dimerization of ZnPc
involved the interaction between the frontier orbitals of the
monomers such as the highest-occupied molecular orbital
(HOMO) and the lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital
(LUMO), and the redshift resulted from the stabilized
LUMO and the destabilized HOMO relative to the monomer. 8
As reviewed
by Kasha, the dipole-allowed redshift in a molecular dimer is
realized in case the transition dipoles of the constituent
monomers are arranged in a head-to-tail manner. 11
[exciton1]

Coplanar inclined transition dipoles lead to the exciton energy diagram shown
between Fig. 3.19a, b, which continuously covers the variation of angle θ between
the polarization axis and the line passing through the molecule centers from θ = 0o
(corresponding to Fig. 3.19b) to θ = 90o (corresponding to Fig. 3.19a). The exci-
ton band splitting ΔE in this case is given by the formula (point dipole approximation)

M and r denote the magnitude of the transition moment for the singlet-singlet tran-
sition in the monomer (i.e., S 0 –S 1 ) and the center-to-center distance between the
molecules, respectively. ΔE becomes zero for θ = 54.7°, where cos 2 θ = 0, i.e.,
the dipole-dipole interaction is zero for this orientation of transition moments in
the aggregate, regardless of the intermolecular distance. That is, the two molecules
behave as an H-aggregate above 54.7° and as a J-aggregate below this angle.
[optical spectra]

The nature and relative importance of the different
contributions to the excitonic coupling were thoroughly
analyzed more than 20 years ago by Harcourt, Scholes, and
Ghiggino in a series of studies.28−30 By considering the
interaction between Frenkel and charge-transfer excited
configurations,28 they identified the dominant non-Coulombic
short-range contributions, both depending on intermolecular
orbital overlap: a penetration interaction, which generally
reinforces the Coulombic term,29 and the Dexter exchange
interaction, which opposes it but is of much smaller
magnitude.30

The non-Coulombic short-range contribution to the excitonic coupling is found to represent up to ∼70% of the total value for molecules in close contact, while, as expected, it is found to be negligible for dimers not in close contact. For the face-to-face dimers considered here, the sign of the short-range interaction is found to correlate with the sign of the Coulombic coupling, i.e. reinforcing it when it is already strong. We conclude that for molecules in van der Waals contact the inclusion of short-range effects is essential for a quantitative description of the exciton dynamics.
[fornari2017]

In recent years, it has been pointed out for some organic
semiconductors that the molecular Frenkel excitons mix with
so-called charge-transfer excited states (CT excitons), which
can also lead to substantial changes of the absorption spectra as
compared to single molecules. 42−59 The most prominent
example is pentacene, where it has been shown that the lowest
singlet exciton has a CT admixture of almost 50% and that
neither the energetic order nor the energy splitting of the two
Davydov components can be rationalized without this
significant CT contribution. 48,51 A sizable admixture of CT
excitons in the lowest excited state has also shown to be able to
explain/model the exciton dispersion in oligoacenes. 48
an interaction based on purely dipole−dipole
Interactions of molecular (Frenkel) excitons is unable to
describe the spectra and the momentum dependence in the β-
phthalocyanines.
[doctor et al.]

Although various
cofacial assemblies have been synthesized so far, the number of
discrete cofacial assemblies of phthalocyanines is much less
than that of porphyrins, presumably because of the limitation of
the synthetic methods and their low solubility in various
solvents. 8,9 Furthermore, it is much more difficult to synthesize
a cofacial assembly in which the relative distances and angles of
each component are perfectly defined. In fact, the discrete
cofacial dimers of phthalocyanines reported so far include some
regioisomers and/or flexible linkers of dimers that do not fix the
components in the desired relative configuration. 7b,8b,10 The
electronic interaction between the components inside a cofacial
phthalocyanine dimer is highly dependent on their relative
configuration.
[rigid_dimer]

14−16 Kasha showed that relative to isolated
monomers molecular dimers stacked “side-by-side” exhibit a
blue-shifted absorption maximum and suppressed radiative
decay rate while dimers stacked “head-to-tail” exhibit a red-
shifted absorption maximum and enhanced radiative decay rate.
The former became known as H-aggregates and the latter as J-
aggregates.
In Kasha’s model, the geometries that lead to J- and H-
aggregates are predicated on long-range Coulomb coupling
alone. However, in certain packing arrangements such as π-
stacks, neighboring molecules are close enough (∼3.5 Å) to
allow for significant wave function overlap and the emergence
of short-range interactions. 23,24 As we show below, such
interactions also promote J- and H-aggregate behavior,
although with significantly different spatial dependencies than
those associated with Kasha’s H- and J-aggregates.
As shown by Harcourt et al., 23 the excitonic interactions can be
divided into long-range Coulombic interactions and short-range
exchange (Dexter 24 ) and superexchange interactions deriving
from wave function overlap.
Retaining only the Coulombic interactions leads to Kasha’s
exciton model, which is summarized in Figure 2. The Coulomb
coupling between any two chromophores arises from the
interaction between their transition charge distributions and is
often expressed using the point-dipole approximation,

where R is the intermolecular distance between mass centers, θ
is the angle between μ and R, and ε is the optical dielectric
constant of the medium.
Intermolecular coupling
leads to delocalized (Frenkel) excitons, which assuming
periodic boundary conditions can be expressed according to
their wave vector, k, as 33

where |n⟩ denotes a HOMO−LUMO excitation on the nth
chromophore. When the coupling is limited to nearest
neighbors, the energy of the exciton with wave vector k is

As only the nodeless (k = 0) exciton carries oscillator strength,
the transition energy is lower than the monomer energy (E S 1 )
when J Coul is negative and higher in energy when J Coul is
positive. This is manifest photophysically as an aggregation-
induced red-shift and blue-shift, respectively, in the optical
absorption spectrum of J-aggregates and H-aggregates.
The geometric embodiment of J- and H-aggregates derives
from eq 1. Hence, “head-to-tail” orientations (θ ≈ 0) give rise
to J-aggregates, while “side-by-side” orientations (θ ≈ π/2) lead
to H-aggregates.More sophisticated treatments of the
Coulomb coupling using atomic transition charge densities
give a qualitatively similar picture. 34−36
In contrast to J Coul , the superexchange interaction derives
from wave function overlap between neighboring molecules
and therefore diminishes exponentially with distance. LUMO−
LUMO and HOMO−HOMO overlap, which can be
substantial in π-stacks due to the close nearest-neighbor
contacts (∼3.5 Å), facilitates the dissociation of local excitations
(|n⟩) into charge-transfer (CT) states 37−40 where electrons and
holes reside on neighboring chromophores.
As shown by Kazmeier and Hoffman, 42 CT integrals
are hypersensitive to the transverse registry of neighboring
chromophores, as they derive from the overlap between
neighboring HOMOs and LUMOs, respectively.
the optical gap is also very sensitive to
intermolecular orientation, leading to the broad range of
pigment colors exhibited by crystalline perylene derivatives. 40,42
[hestand2017]


